---
layout: post
color: '#0c6a99'
title: "The PhD Application from a Faculty's Perspective"
date: 2024-11-28
categories: [general]
tags: [phd]
---


_tldr; to avoid wasting time (your own and faculty's), it is helpful to understand the basic incentives that inform a faculty's PhD recruiting decisions._

The PhD admissions process at top CS departments is highly competitive.
I think it is helpful to understand the PhD admissions process from the faculty's perspective,
and what is prioritized.   It assumes a department where students are admitted by specific faculty rather than to the department as a whole.
This is from my perspective based on what I see. It may not be representative and you may disagree.


<p id='social'> </p>
<script>makesocial('social', "{{page.title}} by @eugenewu.net {{ site.url}}{% post_url 2024-11-28-phdtips %} ")</script>


## Basic Facts

* In round numbers, a PhD costs $100K/year over 5 to 6 years, or a total of $500-600K.   
* The faculty member pays for the PhD.
* \# applicants grows each year; # applicants >> # PhD spots.
* Broadly, the goal of research is to make the highest impact on the world by creating new knowledge.
* Every lab has different definitions of what impact means.
* Research involves many skills including:
  * understanding literature
  * identify value
  * formulate problems
  * design, implement, evaluate novel solutions
  * [ability to write](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vtIzMaLkCaM)

## Basic implications:

* Every year, a faculty member has less time per application.
* The PhD application is a **competition**.
* Funding a PhD is an investment in time and money with the goal to maximize future research impact.

Thus, the purpose of the application is to quickly convince the faculty that you will maximize
their lab's research impact as compared to other applicants.

The statement of purpose is not about your life story, or a list of what you have done, or how are generally interested in the faculty's research area.
It is to quickly provide concrete evidence that you will be the best at conducting research _in the faculty's lab_ under _their definition of impact_.

Further implications and how they apply to a PhD application is left as an exercise to the reader.

## Some basic tips

* Understand _some_ research project in the lab.   Have something to say about it
* Understand [how to approach the application](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLe9dkYfBBHFkJUmqluDocwGuxaZ3y5Zkm)
* Questions about the lab?  Ask the faculty's PhD students.


